Oh.
NOTE CONF
Hey oh hey hey hey hey hey.
You don't keep up.
NOTE CONF
No.
He's on the road in the red.
NOTE CONF
Zone?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Right.
That was the anchor of the Anvil Chorus from IL
NOTE CONF
trovatore.
For those of you who are interested in opera, um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, before I start, I just want to give an
advert for this, um, thing tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
This is an event.
Uh, I happened to be the exchange coordinator for Informatics,
NOTE CONF
as well as being your lecturer here.
And, um, and so this is an event that I
NOTE CONF
do every year to inform students about opportunities for exchanges
abroad.
NOTE CONF
So you can go on an exchange in your third
year to a university somewhere else in the world, um,
NOTE CONF
instead of doing your third year here.
So if you want to know about that, uh, what's
NOTE CONF
possible, it would be in your third year.
So not, you know, you're in your first year now,
NOTE CONF
so you've got time to think about it, but, um,
it's the event is open to you if you want
NOTE CONF
to go.
And it's in, um, in George Square in the psychology
NOTE CONF
building.
There's the location.
NOTE CONF
All right.
And if you don't feel like dragging yourself up to,
NOTE CONF
um, George Square.
Um, it's going to be recorded and, um, the, the
NOTE CONF
recording is actually going to be, um, one of the
recordings for this course.
NOTE CONF
Um, just because it's a place that I could put
it when I set up the recording.
NOTE CONF
So if you want, you can watch it on live
stream, um, or afterwards you can watch the recording.
NOTE CONF
Um, but it'll be live streamed onto the Informatics one
kind of, um, you know, lecture.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yeah, the recordings list.
You know, where they are.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, come along if you're interested.
NOTE CONF
Uh, there'll be a talk from me and then, um,
from some former and current exchange students.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But what I want to talk about today is expression
NOTE CONF
trees as algebraic data types.
Uh, this lecture will probably take, um, two lectures worth
NOTE CONF
of time.
So it will continue on Monday.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I told you about algebraic data types last
time.
NOTE CONF
Um, and how you can, uh, in Haskell, uh, define
types for things like booleans, um, you know, lists.
NOTE CONF
Um, so those are some types that you've seen already,
and, um, and, uh, today I'm going to talk to
NOTE CONF
you about using the same idea to define syntax of,
um, of languages when I use the word syntax, do
NOTE CONF
you know what I'm talking about?
Anybody.
NOTE CONF
Does anybody know what I mean by syntax?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, does anybody not know what I mean by syntax?
I don't see any hands.
NOTE CONF
But you might be shy.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, you know, syntax is like there's this distinction
between in a language, you've got the, the text of
NOTE CONF
the language.
And that's so, you know, like the grammar, the, the
NOTE CONF
words, the level of um, of, of, uh, of what
you say.
NOTE CONF
And then there's the level of meaning.
So syntax is this kind of, I sort of say
NOTE CONF
up here is syntax and down here is meaning it's
kind of like, um, you know, there's the, there's the
NOTE CONF
text and the grammar and so forth.
And then there's the what it means level down here.
NOTE CONF
And there's a relationship obviously between these two levels.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, kind of interpretation of the of the text
goes into the meaning.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, of course going the other direction, if you have
NOTE CONF
some idea and you want to express it, you, you
turn it into language.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So in computer languages you've got the same sort of
NOTE CONF
thing, except that.
So bye bye bye syntax.
NOTE CONF
We're talking about things like Haskell text with the rules
of Haskell for putting together programs.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The, um, you know what?
NOTE CONF
What you're allowed to use is variable names and how
you're allowed to build things like list comprehensions out of
NOTE CONF
the components.
So that syntax and then the meaning or the semantics
NOTE CONF
is, is like what you get when you evaluate those,
those things.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, so what I'm going to be talking about
NOTE CONF
with in this lecture is about representing the syntax of,
of, of languages and, and something about the interpretation of
NOTE CONF
syntax, um, in terms of meanings.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is something that Haskell is really good at
representing.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's very, uh, straightforward and simple to, to represent the,
NOTE CONF
the syntax of languages and to write Programs that do
things on the syntax of languages.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to be showing you a couple of
examples.
NOTE CONF
By the way, another example of syntax and meaning or
semantics is you've been learning in computation and logic.
NOTE CONF
There's this kind of logical language, propositional logic.
And you've got propositional variables and you've got some connectives
NOTE CONF
like conjunctive and conjunction, disjunction and negation.
And the semantics is given by things like truth tables.
NOTE CONF
So, you know, if you have, uh, true and false,
uh, like that expression true and false, it's interpreted as
NOTE CONF
by evaluating it according to the truth tables to get
the result.
NOTE CONF
False.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, hope that's hope.
Hope that's helpful.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, um.
I'm going to start with an example of arithmetic expressions.
NOTE CONF
And they're going to be very simple arithmetic expressions.
Um, That only involve numbers, addition and multiplication.
NOTE CONF
And that's not because division and subtraction are harder.
But just three three cases is simpler to explain than
NOTE CONF
five cases.
It's the only reason.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So we're going to represent simple arithmetic expressions.
NOTE CONF
So things like two plus 7 or 3 times four
plus eight that sort of thing.
NOTE CONF
Really simple.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'm going to do do this using an
algebraic data type called exp for expression.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And um, and it's defined uh, there are three alternatives.
NOTE CONF
So the three alternatives, three constructors separated by vertical bars.
And the three constructors are here.
NOTE CONF
So lit add and mole Okay.
Add stands for additions.
NOTE CONF
Mole stands for multiplication.
Litt stands for literal.
NOTE CONF
So this is a kind of computer science jargon.
Uh, literal.
NOTE CONF
It's um, when you've got in a programming language, something
like a, a number or a string, it's, it's a,
NOTE CONF
it's a kind of thing in your program that doesn't
have to be interpreted it already.
NOTE CONF
The meaning is what it says.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So a string, you don't have to interpret a string
in order to in order to have a value.
NOTE CONF
It's already a value.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's called a literal.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
In this case our literals are our numbers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to be able to write, uh, one
of the kinds of expressions is a literal which is
NOTE CONF
a which is an integer.
So like five another one is going to be add
NOTE CONF
apply to two expressions okay.
This is recursive okay.
NOTE CONF
If you have two expressions like the literal three and
the literal seven.
NOTE CONF
You can you can apply ad to get the, the,
the the expression um ad literal three and literal seven.
NOTE CONF
Um and mul from multiplication similarly takes two expressions as
a result as arguments.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And here are some examples down here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um E0 ad applied to to uh, to Subexpressions first
one is is lit apply to two.
NOTE CONF
So that's the number two as a literal.
And the second is a more complicated one.
NOTE CONF
That's multiplication applied to literal three and literal three.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So those are combined using ad.
And the second E1.
NOTE CONF
Here we've got multiplication or mul applied to two expressions.
That one, I mean, the parentheses are telling me that
NOTE CONF
the end of this expression is here and and that
one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'm calling these things expression trees.
NOTE CONF
Um, I mean, I don't know if that's clear so
far.
NOTE CONF
Let me try to explain some more.
I'm calling these things expression trees.
NOTE CONF
Why is why is that?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I don't see any trees here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, it's because this is a kind of a representation
NOTE CONF
in text of something that's naturally drawn as a as
a tree.
NOTE CONF
And I'll.
I'll show you what I mean with e zero and
NOTE CONF
E1 zero.
Okay so E0 I'll draw it and then I'll explain
NOTE CONF
it.
So it's ad applied to lit which is applied to
NOTE CONF
two.
And the other argument is mul applied to lit applied
NOTE CONF
to three and lit applied to three.
Again okay.
NOTE CONF
And um e1 is um mul applied to um ad.
Um.
NOTE CONF
It's this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, I mentioned trees once before in these lectures.
I think it was when I was talking about, um.
NOTE CONF
explaining fold.
Okay, so trees and computer science, like trees in linguistics,
NOTE CONF
um, grow, uh, upside down.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, you know, trees in, in the forest look like
that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The root is down here, and the branches are up
NOTE CONF
there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In computer science and linguistics.
Um, so this is an taken from linguistics.
NOTE CONF
The root is at the top.
And and and and the branches grow downwards.
NOTE CONF
And you call the things at the bottom leaves.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you'll, you'll I'll be talking about trees more in
these lectures.
NOTE CONF
Um so now this but but so what's going on
here.
NOTE CONF
So this here represents E zero okay.
So it's, it's it's um there's E zero okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's add.
Ah.
NOTE CONF
It's add apply to two subexpressions litt of two and
mul apply to two subexpressions like that.
NOTE CONF
Do you see the structure here?
I hope.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And representing as a tree you see this.
NOTE CONF
You can see the structure.
So it's this, you know, the main thing is add.
NOTE CONF
And then there are two subexpressions.
And in the second subexpression the main thing is mul.
NOTE CONF
And then there are two subexpressions.
And you can see from the shape of this tree,
NOTE CONF
although that it involves both of them involve add and
mul, add and mul.
NOTE CONF
Both of them involve lit two and three and and
twice lit three.
NOTE CONF
There's lit two, twice lit three.
They have different structures okay.
NOTE CONF
Which is you know, here you're adding together the result
of, um, you know, uniting together two and the result
NOTE CONF
of multiplying three by three.
And here you're multiplying the result of adding two and
NOTE CONF
three and, um, and the number three.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, the structure makes these things represent completely different,
different expressions, even though the components are the same.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that's why it's nice to look at them like
NOTE CONF
that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Of course.
These trees, these are just my way of drawing this
NOTE CONF
for conceptual purposes in the computer.
It's, um, you know, lit add expressions and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Um, and the parentheses are used to give a kind
of textual representation of this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Is that kind of clear, I hope.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
What else do I want to say?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Two expressions with different structure.
NOTE CONF
Um, I should also just say here I said in
my other examples that I would be writing some magic
NOTE CONF
words at the end deriving.
In the other examples, it was deriving EQ and show.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'm using different magic words here because I'm going
to not use the built in show function, but I'm
NOTE CONF
going to define one myself because it gives me a
nicer, a nicer way of printing out these things.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then I could finally say, I mean, there's another
NOTE CONF
way of representing these things, of course.
Um, you know, uh, well, we'll see it in a
NOTE CONF
second, actually.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, okay.
Here is how you could represent that in normal kind
NOTE CONF
of mathematical, um, notation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this one would be, um.
Two plus three times three.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Whether the parentheses around it or not doesn't matter.
NOTE CONF
This is the way that they happen to be printed
out by my show function which I just skipped over.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you could you could manipulate expressions as strings.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We possible to represent them as strings and to manipulate
NOTE CONF
them as strings and do all the things that I'm
going to do as strings.
NOTE CONF
But it's a lot more work because when they're in
this form, you have to kind of figure out by
NOTE CONF
looking, you know, where the parentheses and where the matching
parentheses and so forth.
NOTE CONF
You have to figure out where subexpressions begin and end
and so forth.
NOTE CONF
When they're in, when they're in this form.
Wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Why is this not letting me go backwards?
Hmm.
NOTE CONF
Interesting.
Um, when they're in the form like this, with these,
NOTE CONF
with this data type, this outbreak data type.
It's easy to to.
NOTE CONF
To like take them apart and put them together and
do things with the components okay.
NOTE CONF
That's the reason.
So that's representing arithmetic expressions as an algebraic data type.
NOTE CONF
And now once I have this representation I can write
functions that do things with them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
For example this first this first function evaluates them okay.
NOTE CONF
So evaluating something like um, you know, uh, two plus
three times three.
NOTE CONF
You know, it's a simple computation.
The answer is 11.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, here's the code for doing that.
NOTE CONF
And then the other one that I have here is
just for, um, uh, turning them into strings in a
NOTE CONF
form like I showed you a second ago.
Um, you know, like this.
NOTE CONF
And that's what I'm going to use for my show
function.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, so let me look at this.
At this.
NOTE CONF
The code for this expression evaluation thing okay.
So this is a function which takes syntax.
NOTE CONF
This is exactly what I was talking before about syntax
turning into meaning okay.
NOTE CONF
Interpretation of the syntax.
In this case the syntax is arithmetic expressions with numbers
NOTE CONF
in them and turning them into meaning or interpreting them
is is doing the actual computation okay.
NOTE CONF
And there are three cases.
So I you know, because I've defined this as an
NOTE CONF
algebraic data type, I can write pattern matching.
Um, uh, you know case.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Pattern matching.
NOTE CONF
Definition of functions by cases.
There are three cases because there are three, um, three
NOTE CONF
um constructors.
And so a case for each constructor.
NOTE CONF
And um, this code is so I mean, to me,
I don't know what it looks like to you.
NOTE CONF
To me, this code is so simple that it's almost
hard to see what it's doing.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
A tip is that the left hand side.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is a function from expressions to integers.
So this is the level of syntax.
NOTE CONF
And this is the level of meaning or semantics okay.
So everything on the left hand side here is syntax.
NOTE CONF
So these are things from this world of expressions.
And everything on the right hand side is is in
NOTE CONF
the world of meanings or semantics in this case integers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So everything over here is going to be calculations on
integers.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So simplest case actually.
NOTE CONF
Well simplest case is if you've got a literal integer
then the evaluation of that is simply that integer.
NOTE CONF
Whatever it is okay.
The the the evaluating lit of three.
NOTE CONF
The answer is three.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Not actually doing anything except um, taking off the constructor.
Lit.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The more interesting cases are uh, add and mul and
NOTE CONF
they are the same except for the constructor add here,
mul here, and on the right hand side plus and
NOTE CONF
times okay.
Plus for add obviously.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And so in order to evaluate uh the expression which
NOTE CONF
is you know, add e to F, you evaluate e.
That's a recursive call to the eval exp function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And you evaluate f another recursive call.
NOTE CONF
And then you add those together.
So this gives you this gives you an integer.
NOTE CONF
This gives you an integer.
So you got two integers.
NOTE CONF
You add them together.
And that's the answer.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's just look at that.
On, um.
NOTE CONF
Over here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If I want to add if I want to evaluate
this, this, um, this is remember, this is a representation
NOTE CONF
of what I had before it was called E1.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
E0.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Just drawn as a tree.
NOTE CONF
If I want to evaluate add lit two and mul
lit three and lit three, what it tells me is
NOTE CONF
apply eval exp to this thing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The answer is going to be two and apply eval
to this thing.
NOTE CONF
The result is going to be what anybody listening.
Six Mo.
NOTE CONF
Three times.
Three.
NOTE CONF
Anybody?
Nine.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Two plus nine is 11.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So the answer is going to be 11 okay.
NOTE CONF
Evaluate.
Evaluate the left hand subtree to get two.
NOTE CONF
Evaluate the right hand subtree to get nine.
Add them together to get 11 okay.
NOTE CONF
And then the same thing the same thing here except
we're multiplying okay.
NOTE CONF
So we we evaluate the left hand.
Uh subexpression.
NOTE CONF
We evaluate the right hand Subexpression.
And we multiply them to get the results.
NOTE CONF
So this would apply to the second example up here
okay.
NOTE CONF
We want to evaluate this, uh this value here this
this expression tree okay.
NOTE CONF
Again this is E1 which you can write using these
constructors.
NOTE CONF
So mul applied to to this and this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we evaluate this add of of of lit two
and lit three is.
NOTE CONF
Anybody.
Five.
NOTE CONF
Yes and five multiplied by the result of evaluating this
is three five times three is 15 okay.
NOTE CONF
And you know so I explained that just looking at
the top, at the top, um, thing the so-called root
NOTE CONF
of this tree.
But you know, the way that I get.
NOTE CONF
The result of evaluating this is again, it's this it's
the third case here.
NOTE CONF
Multiply to three.
And and, you know, multiplied to the result of evaluating
NOTE CONF
this and the result of validating that is nine.
That's how I got the nine okay.
NOTE CONF
So um.
Does that make sense.
NOTE CONF
And I mean, this one is so it's so, um,
it does so, so little that, um, you know, just
NOTE CONF
it just it looks at the, the, the literal and
the, the result is n so, you know, the, the
NOTE CONF
result of evaluating this is two because that's the number
that's in that's just packaged up as a, as a
NOTE CONF
literal as syntax.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um okay.
So the answer to the E zero was evaluated to
NOTE CONF
11 and the other one evaluated to um 15.
And in fact that's what it does if I type
NOTE CONF
this into Haskell and evaluate those two expressions okay.
Oh by the way.
NOTE CONF
So I said okay, I didn't I didn't go over
the code, but um, here is code that, you know,
NOTE CONF
turns, um, Expressions into strings in a form like this.
If I use the default show function, which I would
NOTE CONF
get if I if I typed here instead of deriving
EQ.
NOTE CONF
So this only gives me equality.
If I said deriving show EQ, then I would get
NOTE CONF
a show function as well for converting these things into
strings, and what they would look like would be exactly.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Like what?
NOTE CONF
What you had here, minus the highlighting.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You know, would be just using the constructors to display
the values, which is not quite as readable as, um,
NOTE CONF
as something like that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's see, what else do I have here?
Um, is that is that so far making sense?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
The function evil.
NOTE CONF
Evil X is recalling um, in definition of Adam.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so when evil acts is recalled, it's not mentioning.
Well, you can't see it now.
NOTE CONF
It's not on the screen.
It's not mentioning the lead.
NOTE CONF
So lead is not that significant.
It's not mentioning.
NOTE CONF
What?
So when it's recalling evil x e in the definition
NOTE CONF
of ad, it's not mentioning lead.
So lead is not that significant or how does it
NOTE CONF
work.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So lit lit I mean in the case that's about
lit that says everything you say about lit okay.
NOTE CONF
The case about AD doesn't have to say anything about
it.
NOTE CONF
Uh about lit.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because because when it evaluates E, whatever E is, it
NOTE CONF
will give you a value which is an integer.
So leave an x and it's the same there equivalent.
NOTE CONF
To lit.
And x, and is there equivalent to each other.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Eval eval x of lit n is the same as
NOTE CONF
n.
Like the equation says.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
Maybe not.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The thing on the left.
NOTE CONF
The thing on the left is an expression.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
One of the cases of an expression is lit of
NOTE CONF
int.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The int in this case is is n whatever n
is okay.
NOTE CONF
The thing on the right is an integer.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So uh n is an integer.
So that's okay.
NOTE CONF
It's kind of it's kind of confusing because it's it's
doing almost nothing.
NOTE CONF
It's just unpacking the number that's inside the, the literature
literal.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Anybody else?
NOTE CONF
Anybody else want a chance to talk into the big
red cube?
NOTE CONF
No.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so here's a variation.
Wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, here's a variation on this.
Uh, it's just a notational thing, and I'm only showing
NOTE CONF
you this to, um, you know, it's one of the
things you can do in Haskell, uh, is to, um,
NOTE CONF
is to make is to make, um, constructors and function
names into into.
NOTE CONF
I'm calling you know, the terminology is infix.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You've seen this already with, uh, with other functions that
I've introduced.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So, um, you can make the constructors here infix I
NOTE CONF
mean that these two constructors add in mul you can
make them infix by simply putting back quotes around them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And um, the only reason that this is kind of
NOTE CONF
a nice thing to do is that is that writing,
writing these expressions like this makes them look a little
NOTE CONF
bit more like normal arithmetic expressions.
Okay, because you're used to writing plus between the the
NOTE CONF
things that you're adding together.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But um, you know, so I'm just I'm just pointing
out you can do that if you want.
NOTE CONF
Makes things a little clearer.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then, you know, you can you can use that
to, um, to write exactly these same function definitions.
NOTE CONF
And the difference is only, uh, here.
And here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The constructors.
NOTE CONF
Well, also of course, here's the definition of that, of
that, um, data type, same data type.
NOTE CONF
It's just that we're defining it to have I mean,
we're just writing the, the, the constructors in infix form.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so this is just saying that, um, I mean
NOTE CONF
it's actually it's actually completely equivalent to what I wrote
before.
NOTE CONF
It's just, uh, written in a different way.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to belabour this point.
I think it's, um, possibly just confusing.
NOTE CONF
Um, anyway, okay.
Um, let me see what else.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah, I'll say another another variation on this.
If you want, you could use symbolic constructors instead of
NOTE CONF
the, you know, I'm using up here, add and mul.
I could just as well use symbolic constructors like like
NOTE CONF
these two here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Now.
NOTE CONF
uh, the reason for doing this would be the same
as as what I had a second ago when I
NOTE CONF
was writing.
Um, you know, um, uh, constructors, you know, add in
NOTE CONF
back quotes to, to make it look a little bit
more like, like normal arithmetic notation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But now I'm using symbols plus and times.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Why do I write colon plus colon instead of just
NOTE CONF
plus.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well, um, in Haskell constructors that are, that are symbols,
you know, just like, uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
In Haskell, all types begin with capital letters.
All functions begin with small letters.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
All constructors begin with capital letters, okay?
NOTE CONF
And if the constructor is symbolic, then all symbolic constructors
begin with a colon.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Why a colon?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because cons is a colon.
NOTE CONF
It's just in order to get that to fit into
this this requirement okay.
NOTE CONF
So in in in Haskell, all constructors that are symbolic
like this one begin with a colon.
NOTE CONF
Cons is a constructor is a colon.
And I've written it with a colon at the end
NOTE CONF
just to make it look a little bit prettier.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, it doesn't have to be that way.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I could have written exactly the same, um,
the same definition.
NOTE CONF
Like this.
um, and, uh, write all the code, you know, so,
NOTE CONF
so now my my expressions e0 and E let me
go back to this.
NOTE CONF
My expressions e zero and e1, uh, could be written
using these, uh, symbolic constructors instead, which looks an awful
NOTE CONF
lot like, um, like what I get from the show
function.
NOTE CONF
Okay, here's here's E0 and E1.
Written using these symbolic constructors.
NOTE CONF
And here's what you get by by, um, uh, using
the show function that I defined on the previous slide
NOTE CONF
that I didn't show you in detail how it worked,
but it just replaces, you know, it just it just
NOTE CONF
goes through and and turns these into strings.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Maybe it is actually worth looking at that just briefly,
the form of this is very similar to the form
NOTE CONF
of this, of this, of this eval function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Again, three cases, one for each constructor.
And the only difference is that on the right hand
NOTE CONF
side here we had integers and we were doing multiplication
and addition okay.
NOTE CONF
That's the meaning.
That's what evaluation gives.
NOTE CONF
Whereas turning things into string strings we have over here
manipulations on strings okay.
NOTE CONF
So to get a string for the integer n uh
the function show this is a function in Haskell that
NOTE CONF
you can use apply to any value to get a
string.
NOTE CONF
Actually not every value but many values okay.
So this will give you a string representing this integer.
NOTE CONF
And then um, you know, to put together the string
for E and the string for F with a plus
NOTE CONF
in the middle, we can use append.
Okay, this is a string.
NOTE CONF
This is a string.
This plus thing in the middle here is a string.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
And append.
NOTE CONF
Append here and here is used for putting these strings
together.
NOTE CONF
All right.
If this is all a little bit bewildering, bewildering for
NOTE CONF
you all, let me just suggest you look.
You concentrate on this first on this first version.
NOTE CONF
The others are just slightly prettier versions of the same
thing.
NOTE CONF
But the first one is the one that, um, that
has all of the content in it.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so Let me see.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So are there any questions about that?
I want to move on to another example.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Let me throw you the.
NOTE CONF
Hoops.
Nice shot.
NOTE CONF
Um, is the second column necessary?
The second column.
NOTE CONF
I think you said that the second column.
When you o.
NOTE CONF
The second column.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Second column.
You mean like here?
NOTE CONF
No.
Completely unnecessary.
NOTE CONF
I put it in just to make it prettier.
Because plus is a kind of, you know, it's a.
NOTE CONF
Well, so you could just put one column in a
plus.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
You could.
NOTE CONF
I mean, yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any other.
Questions?
NOTE CONF
The first column is necessary just because it says this
thing is a constructor.
NOTE CONF
Anybody else I'm going to move on to another example
now.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
My other example is um propositions.
NOTE CONF
So this is logic.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And this is connecting together computation and logic part of
the course and functional programming part of the course.
NOTE CONF
Again okay.
So I can represent propositions in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Um and here is a data type algebraic data type
for um propositions that have uh false true negation um
NOTE CONF
disjunction and conjunction.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So these are the propositions you've been dealing with and,
and variables, uh, having strings as names.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is like the full the part of process.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Propositional logic has more stuff in it a little bit
NOTE CONF
more.
You'll learn about implication in case Julian hasn't talked about
NOTE CONF
it yet.
Don't know.
NOTE CONF
Um, anyway, this is this is propositional logic without implication
in it.
NOTE CONF
Um, but it doesn't matter.
Anyway, we've got we've got here now six cases.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so you can represent the stuff that you've been
NOTE CONF
doing in your, in your, in your logic exercises.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we've got uh variables.
So six cases, six constructors.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, the first four constructors are like, um, you know,
NOTE CONF
alphabetic, you know, var feet and nought.
And the, these two I've chosen to do as symbolic
NOTE CONF
constructors.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So colon uh, two vertical bars colon and colon.
Uh, two Ampersands.
NOTE CONF
Colon okay.
This is disjunction.
NOTE CONF
This is conjunction.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So um, going through these six cases.
We've got um, the first one is, is, uh, you
NOTE CONF
know, we've got three cases that are, that are recursive
in three cases that are non recursive.
NOTE CONF
So the simplest ones are these here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the the case of a of a propositional variable,
it's the constructor of var to say this is a
NOTE CONF
variable.
And then the name of the variable which I've defined
NOTE CONF
here to be a string.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um I'm using strings as names okay.
So this is just propositional variables.
NOTE CONF
This is this is um what I'm going to use
to represent false.
NOTE CONF
And this is what I'm going to use to represent
true.
NOTE CONF
Why do I not use false false and true Okay.
Reason is that, um, Haskell would complain that I'm using
NOTE CONF
the same thing for two, uh, having two types.
It would get confused.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so f and T, that's the only reason.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, the last three cases here are the recursive one.
So, um, you know, not apply to a proposition.
NOTE CONF
Gives me a proposition prop here is proposition okay a
prop and this, this, um, disjunction forming thing here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And another prop that gives me a proposition.
NOTE CONF
So this is the disjunction of two propositions.
And this is the conjunction of two propositions prop.
NOTE CONF
And then this um this symbol this this constructor here
and then prop okay.
NOTE CONF
So six cases.
So this is more complicated example than what I had
NOTE CONF
a minute ago.
Um So a proposition is one of six things.
NOTE CONF
There are the six cases.
And I can form propositions like this one down here.
NOTE CONF
Let me draw that as a tree.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's this some conjunction thing applied to two propositions.
This is this is this is P0 okay.
NOTE CONF
From my from from up there okay.
So what's the first thing.
NOTE CONF
The first thing is um constructor var applied to the
name a.
NOTE CONF
So this is a string.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And what's the second thing.
It's the constructor not applied to var.
NOTE CONF
of A.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Not very exciting.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
This is representing, um, what I what what Julian would
write as, um, a and not a.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this and this form, which is just drawing P0
NOTE CONF
out in the form of a tree.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is showing the structure of this, of this thing,
showing the structure of this expression a and and then
NOTE CONF
a subexpression not a.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, one thing to point out here is that in
these, um, algebraic data types, you always need.
NOTE CONF
Wait a minute trying to see what time it is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You always need constructors for every case.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Six cases, six constructors.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
A natural question is couldn't I just leave this one
out?
NOTE CONF
Because somehow it's Haskell should sort of figure it out.
If I use a string here, um, as a prop,
NOTE CONF
that.
That's what I mean.
NOTE CONF
Okay, the answer is no.
You can't leave it out.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, uh, um, okay, so that's that's the way
Haskell is defined.
NOTE CONF
You can't leave it out.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Another, another, um, another part of the answer is, you
know, why can't you leave it out?
NOTE CONF
Why is Haskell defined that way?
And the reason Haskell's defined that way is that, uh,
NOTE CONF
type checking, this whole type checking thing in Haskell, the
fact that it can figure out what the types are
NOTE CONF
in your program and it can even figure them out
if you don't tell them what the you know, if
NOTE CONF
you write a function without telling you what type it
is, it'll figure out what type it is.
NOTE CONF
All of that works.
It's like on the borderline of being possible, and this
NOTE CONF
is one of the things that you need to have
to make that be possible is that there's always constructors,
NOTE CONF
um, whenever you're using a, um, algebraic data type.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I could maybe mention at this point, I said last
time that algebraic data types is one of the things
NOTE CONF
that was invented in Edinburgh that contributed to functional programming.
Another thing that contributed to functional programming invented here was
NOTE CONF
type checking for, um, for this this style of language.
Um, another, um, former professor here, Robin Milner, who won
NOTE CONF
the Turing Award for this work and other work.
Um, related to that?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, I'm coming to the end of my time, which
NOTE CONF
I keep looking at my watch to decide where I'm
going to stop.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so these are propositions, and I can write a
function to turn a proposition into into a string.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it takes a prop and it gives you a
NOTE CONF
string.
There are six cases because there are six, um, kinds
NOTE CONF
of proposition, one for each, one for each, um, constructor.
And on the right hand side I have a string.
NOTE CONF
So, you know, the, the, the, the case of our
x x is a string.
NOTE CONF
And so, um, turning that into a string is just
the, the value x.
NOTE CONF
um f and trees.
And these other cases, you have to turn um, the
NOTE CONF
subexpressions into strings, like here for example.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Turn P into a string.
We want.
NOTE CONF
We want to turn this into a string.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So we turn P into a string.
We turn Q into a string.
NOTE CONF
And we join together them together using append with a,
you know, double vertical bar in the middle.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, you know.
NOTE CONF
Note.
It's important with these things to see the, the, um,
NOTE CONF
the form of the function follows the form of the,
of the type definition.
NOTE CONF
This we saw this already with list.
Um, with definition of functions on lists using recursion and
NOTE CONF
pattern matching.
Um, definitions.
NOTE CONF
Okay, we've got six cases here.
Um, the type definition is recursive in three places.
NOTE CONF
I mean three, three of the six cases and the
function definition on that type, we've got six cases, one
NOTE CONF
for each constructor.
And it's recursive exactly in the places where the type
NOTE CONF
definition is recursive.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um here P is a prop.
And so we need to use recursion to turn it
NOTE CONF
into a string.
You know p and q here are props.
NOTE CONF
And so we use recursion here and there okay.
So the the pattern of the function follows the the
NOTE CONF
pattern of the type definition.
And um evaluation is similar I think I'm going to
NOTE CONF
I think this is a place where I'm going to
ask for questions and pick this up at this point
NOTE CONF
in the next lecture, because it's a little bit requires
a little bit of explanation, but before it.
NOTE CONF
Don't don't just leave.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions at this point?
Because this stuff I know, it's, um, I know it's
NOTE CONF
a little hard.
Or at least students in the past have found it
NOTE CONF
hard.
And so I want to give you a chance to
NOTE CONF
ask questions if there are any, um, anybody.
You all you're all comfortable with this.
NOTE CONF
You're going to be writing data type algebraic data type
definitions starting tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
Okay?
I mean, if there are no questions, then, uh, thanks
NOTE CONF
for your attention.
And I'll pick this up on Monday at this point.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Here's.
NOTE CONF
I wanted to ask some quick question about the curse.
Uh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
According to the academic calendar of the.